Our anomaly detection approach is based on evaluating the
communication patterns of a device to determine whether it is
consistent with the learned benign communication patterns of
that particular device type. The detection process is shown in
Fig. 2. In Step 1 the communication between the Security
Gateway and the IoT device is captured as a sequence of
packets pkt1
, pkt2
, . . .. Each packet pkt i
is then in Step
2 mapped to a corresponding symbol si characterizing the
type of the packet using a mapping that is based on distinct
characteristics c1, c2, . . . , c7 derived from each packet’s header
information as discussed in Sect. III-A. The mapped sequence
of symbols s1, s2, . . . is then in Step 3 input into a pretrained model using Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs) [16],
[17]. The GRU model will calculate a probability estimate
pi for each symbol si based on the sequence of k preceding
symbols si−k, si−k+1, . . . , si−1. GRU is a novel approach to
recurrent neural networks (RNN) currently being a target of
lively research. GRUs provide similar accuracy as other RNN
approaches but are computationally less expensive [17], [18].
In Step 4 the sequence of occurrence probability estimates
p1, p2, . . . is evaluated to determine possible anomalies. If the
occurrence probabilities pi of a sufficient number of packets
in a window of consecutive packets fall below a detection
threshold, as described in detail in Sect. III-B, the packet
sequence is deemed anomalous and an alarm is raised.
A. Modelling Packet Sequences
Data packets pkt i
in the packet sequence pkt1
, pkt2
, . . .
emitted by an IoT device are mapped into packet symbols
si based on 7-tuples (c1, c2, . . . , c7) of discrete packet characteristics ci of packet pkt i
. This mapping is defined by
a device-type-specific mapping function mappingtype#k
:
A → Btype#k s.t. mappingtype#k
(pkt i
) = si where A is
the domain of raw network packets pkt and Btype#k is the
domain of packet symbols s for device-type type#k. Mapping
mappingtype#k
assigns each unique combination of packet
characteristics (c1, . . . , c7) a dedicated symbol s representing
the ’type’ of the particular packet.
We use the following packet characteristics shown also in
Tab. I:
• c1 direction: (incoming / outgoing) Normal TCP traffic is
usually balanced two-way communication but abnormal
is not as, e.g., a bot only sends packets to a victim without
receiving replies when running DDoS attacks.
• c2 and c3 local and remote port type: (system / user
/ dynamic) Each device-type uses specific ports designed
by the manufacturers while malicious attack patterns
usually use different ports.
• c4 packet length: (bin index of packet’s length where
eight most frequently occurring packet lengths receive
dedicated bins and one bin for other packet length values)
Each device-type communicates using specific packet
patterns with specific packet lengths that are mostly
different in malicious attack patterns.
• c5 TCP flags: Normal communications contain packets with specific TCP flag sequences e.g., SY N →
SY NACK → ACK → P USH → F IN. However,
many attacks do not follow standard protocols, e.g., SYN
flood (DDoS attack) only sends SY N messages.
• c6 encapsulated protocol types: Each device type usually uses a set of specific protocols, which is likely
different from protocol types used in attacks.
• c7 IAT bin: (bin index of packet inter-arrival time (IAT)
using three bins: < 0.001 ms, 0.001 ms to 0.05 ms, and
> 0.05 ms) Many attacks (e.g., DDoS) usually generate
traffic at a high packet rate, resulting in smaller IAT
values in than normal communications.